---
layout: post
title: "Planting trees for climate mitigation?"
date: 2019-07-17
tags: [twitter-thread]
---

Read on Twitter: <a href="http://bit.ly/2JJmH8A" target="_blank"><i class="fab fa-twitter-square fa-1x" title="twitter-thread"></i></a> 

Planting trees for climate mitigation ? (200 billion tons of carbon stored using a trillion trees?)

-> “was immediately welcomed by those who still dream of climate mitigation that doesn’t hurt.”

-> “Unfortunately, it’s also too good to be true.” [http://bit.ly/2LSsKKN](http://bit.ly/2LSsKKN)

Why?

“Mankind is currently blowing 11 billion tonnes of carbon (gigatonnes C, abbreviated GtC) into the air every year in the form of CO2 – and the trend is rising. These 11 GtC correspond to 40 gigatons of CO2, because the CO2molecule is 3.7 times heavier than only the C atom. “

“Since 1850, the total has been 640 GtC – of which 31 % is land use (mostly deforestation), 67 % fossil energy and 2 % other sources.” (<span class="tweet-mention">@gcarbonproject</span> figs)

“The result is that the amount of CO2 in our air has risen by half and is thus higher than it has been for at least 3 million years (...) The GHG effect of CO2 has been known since the 19th century; it is physically understood and completely undisputed in science.”

“But: this CO2 increase in the air is only equivalent to a total of just under 300 GtC, although we emitted 640 GtC! This means that, fortunately, only less than half of our emissions remained in the atmosphere, the rest was absorbed by oceans and forests.”

“Which incidentally proves that the CO2 increase in the atmosphere was caused entirely by humans. The additional CO2 does not come from the ocean or anywhere else from nature. The opposite is true: the natural Earth system absorbs part of our CO2 burden from the atmosphere.”

“Conversely, this also means that if we extract 200 GtC from the atmosphere, the amount in the atmosphere does not decrease by 200 GtC, but by much less, because oceans and forests also buffer this. This, too, has already been examined in more detail in the scientific literature”

“Jones et al. 2016 found that the amount of carbon removed from the atmosphere amounts to only 60% or less of the negative emissions, when these are implemented on the background of a mitigation scenario (RCP2.6).”

“The 200 GtC (captured by trees) would be less than one third of the 640 GtC total emissions, not two thirds. [...] it would take fifty to one hundred years for the thousand billion trees to store 200 GtC – 2 to 4 GtC per year, compared to our current emissions of 11 GtC/year”

“That’s about one-fifth to one-third – and this proportion will decrease if emissions continue to grow. This sounds quite different from the prospect of solving two-thirds of the climate problem with trees.”

“Precisely because reforestation takes a very long time, it should be taboo today to cut down mature, species-rich forests, which are large carbon reservoirs and a valuable treasure trove of biological diversity.”

“Another problem that the authors do not mention: a considerable part of the lands eligible for planting are in the far north in Alaska, Canada, Finland and Siberia. Although it is possible to store carbon there with trees, albeit very slowly, this would be counterproductive:”

“For in snowy regions, forests are much darker than snow-covered unwooded areas. While the latter reflect a lot of solar radiation back into space, the forests absorb it and thus increase global warming instead of reducing it (Bala et al. 2007, Perugini et al. 2017).”

“And increased regional warming of the Arctic permafrost areas in particular would be a terrible mistake: permafrost contains more carbon than all trees on earth together, around 1,400 GtC. We’d be fools to wake this sleeping giant.”

“I’d still consider it optimistic to assume that half of the calculated theoretical planting potential can be realized in practice. Then we’re talking of 1-2 GtC of negative emissions per year. But that is precisely what we will need urgently in the future.”

“The current global CO2 emissions can be reduced by 80-90 % through transforming our energy, heating and transport systems – but there will remain a rest that will be hard get rid of from agriculture, industrial processes and long-haul flights) and that we will have to offset”

Another problem : “Without effective climate protection, progressive warming will lead to a massive loss of existing forest cover, especially in the tropics. At the same time, the models are not yet able to make reliable statements on how forests can cope with new extremes”

“The massive planting of trees worldwide is therefore a project that we should tackle quickly. We should not do that with monocultures but carefully, close to nature and sustainably, in order to reap various additional benefits of forests”

“But we must not fall for illusions about how many billions of tons of CO2 this will take out of the atmosphere. [...] not for the illusion that this will buy us time [...]. On the contrary, we need a rapid end to fossil precisely because we want to preserve the world’s forests.”

Thanks to <span class="tweet-mention">@rahmstorf</span> for clearing this out!